<h1>
1 The Importance of Passphrases

</h1>
Unlike most other crypto-currencies and traditional tokens of value, a BURST account is secured only by a single passphrase which can be thought of as a very secure password. We call this a “Brain Wallet”. The passphrase is the only identifier needed in order to transact using BURST and in order to Forge BURST blocks. There are no additional wallet files of any sort.

Unlike traditional web sites which limit the number of login attempts and do not disclose the authentication algorithm, the open source and free BURST client allows an unlimited number of login attempts which can be executed very quickly, at rates reaching billions of login attempts per second. Considering this, and unlike traditional passwords, your passphrase has to be very long and complex. The BURST client account registration process is known to generate very secure passphrases. We recommend that you use it. Alternatively, you can choose a passphrase with at least 35 truly random characters.

If you are using special characters in your passphrase i.e. not just numbers or letters, make sure to use the ASCII representation of these characters and not one of the Unicode representations. For example the quote character " can be represented as ascii code 34 (0x22) but also as various unicode characters as explained here <http://www.amp-what.com/unicode/search/quote> these are considered different characters when used in a passphrase so to avoid confusion we recommend always using the ascii version of these characters or not using them at all. For example MS Word uses the “ unicode character by default which differs from the " ascii character and will cause your passphrase to generate a different account address.

Losing your passphrase means losing your funds, there is no way to recover your passphrase. It is YOUR responsibility. If you cannot accept this, better don't use BURST.

<h3>
1.1 Mitigating Risks of BURST loss

</h3>
Let's analyze the various risks and how to mitigate them. The main risks are:

-   Losing your passphrase.
-   Letting someone steal your passphrase.
-   Accidentally sending your BURST to an account with an unknown passphrase.

If you are one of those guys who always mess up things online and need customer support, you will have to exercise extra care to not to lose your BURST one way or the other.

<h3>
1.2 Best Ways to remember your Passphrase

</h3>
If you lose your passphrase there is no way to recover it. The chance of forgetting your passphrase is much higher than getting your password stolen.

The best way not to forget your passphrase is to store it somewhere safe, preferably in more than one secure place or backing up your secure storage somewhere safe.

You have to accept that there are risks no matter where you store your passphrase.

-   If you store it on your hard drive - the drive might crash.
-   If you store it in a password manager - the passwords file might get corrupted or deleted.
-   If you print it on paper - the paper might get burned or lost.
-   If you store it in your brain - you might forget it.

Therefore, by using more than one storage method, you lower the risk.

<h3>
1.3 Keep Your Passphrase Safe

</h3>
Eventually you have to use your passphrase on your local workstation to sign transactions.

So you have to store it securely, preferably in more than one place, and at least one of these places needs to be easily accessible.

Again there is no 100% security, but there are best practices:

-   Don't share your passphrase with anyone.
-   Don't store your passphrase unencrypted on a remote node or your local workstation.
-   Always use the official BURST wallet.
-   Take special care when connecting to remote nodes.
-   Do not leave your passphrase printed on paper next to your computer.
-   Split your BURST to several accounts, use the smaller balances for daily operations and only access the higher balance accounts when necessary.

Using a password manager, that allows you to store multiple passwords encrypted under a single database password, can be secure and convenient. A free, open source option is Keepass.

### 2.0 How Secure is your Passphrase

When creating a BURST wallet it is important to use a minimum of a 12 word passphrase to avoid [Brute Force Attacks](wikipedia-brute-force-attack.md) and [Rainbow Table Attacks](wikipedia-rainbow-table.md).  Your passphrase is your **Private Key** and must be very secured.  To a first time user using a set of predefined publicly available words may seem counterintuitive.

In fact, to put in perspective how many passwords can be generated by a list of 1626 words in a 12 word combination, the number would be 341,543,870,028,173,427,817,970,975,906,355,941,376 or 341 undecillion. That can be broken down into 341 billion billion billion billion. This is called a “large number” in mathematics, difficult to imagine because of how astronomically large it is. Brute forcing a 12 words passphrase will, on average, take longer than the universe has existed – billions of billions of years. 5 Words is over 2,000 years, each additional word make it 1,626 times harder.

| Number of Words | Possible Passphrase Combinations                    |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------|
| 1               | 1,626                                               |
| 2               | 2,643,876                                           |
| 3               | 4,298,942,376                                       |
| 4               | 6,990,080,303,376                                   |
| 5               | 11,365,870,573,289,400                              |
| 6               | 18,480,905,552,168,500,000                          |
| 7               | 30,049,952,427,826,000,000,000                      |
| 8               | 48,861,222,647,645,100,000,000,000                  |
| 9               | 79,448,348,025,071,000,000,000,000,000              |
| 10              | 129,183,013,888,765,000,000,000,000,000,000         |
| 11              | 210,051,580,583,132,000,000,000,000,000,000,000     |
| 12              | 341,543,870,028,173,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 |

In conclusion, your wallet is safe with a 12 words auto generated passphrase. You should be much more worried about viruses and keyloggers. Adding capital letters, numbers or symbols makes the passphrase exponentially harder to crack (virtually impossible). In its [mobile wallet](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=org.icewave.burstcoinwallet), the PoC Consortium even added new words to the list.

[1]

<references />

[1] <https://www.burstcoin.ist/2017/10/07/is-the-automatically-generated-passphrase-secure/>
